## Abstract
Hydrogen is considered the optimal solution for achieving high efficiency and low emissions in Wankel rotary engines (WREs). This paper aims to reveal the effect of ignition patterns on the combustion process of a  hydrogen-fueled WRE. The results show that the combustion rate of the trailing spark plug (TSP), due to its structural similarity with the passive precombustion chamber, surpasses that of the leading spark plug (LSP). The unidirectional flow field promotes the forward development of the flame of TSP but inhibits the backward development of the flame of LSP. Moreover, the recess in combustion chamber facilitates flame propagation of TSP. Asynchronous ignition mode exhibits a higher indicated thermal efficiency (ITE) than synchronous ignition mode, facilitating effective control of the combustion phase. When the ignition timing of LSP is delayed, and TSP is earlier, the flame of TSP exceeds LSP, resulting in unchanged ITE. When the ignition timing of TSP is delayed, and LSP is earlier, the peak of free radicals and burned volume rate are the highest, resulting in a faster combustion rate. It is recommended that the LSP ignition timing is set earlier for practical operations.

## 1 Introduction
Given the global emphasis on low-carbon and sustainable development, the transportation sector’s role in carbon reduction and energy conservation is of particular significance [1,2]. Hybrid electric vehicles amalgamate the advantages of both electric and petrol-powered vehicles, thereby enhancingrange and diminishing carbon emissions [3,4]. Consequently, the development of an efficient dedicated hybrid engine (DHE) is crucial for electric vehicles advancement [5,6]. Considering factors such as vibration, noise, component count, and power-to-weight ratio, Wankel rotary engines (WREs) are preferred for DHE over reciprocating piston and turbojet engines [7,8]. Thus, enhancing the thermal efficiency and mitigating emissions have been the primary developmental directions in recent years [9,10]. 
Advanced technologies, including alternative fuels [11] and ignition strategies [12,13], have found successful application in WRE. These technologies significantly mitigate the issues of elevated fuel consumption and emissions resulting from long and narrow combustion chambers [14,15]. In the realm of alternative fuels, researchers have concentrated on the utilization of hydrogen [16], natural gas [17], methanol [18], and ethanol [19] in engines. Notably, research dedicated to the evaluation of hydrogen in WREs holds particular significance [20]. In comparison to alternative fuels, the physical and chemical attributes of hydrogen [21]—such as a minimal quenching gap, broad flammability range, rapid diffusive velocity, low ignition energy, and high auto-ignition temperature—present an appealing and suitable choice for WREs [22]. Hydrogen-associated technologies, encompassing port fuel injection (PFI) [23] and direct injection (DI) [24] hydrogen enrichment, have been successfully implemented in WRE. Owing to its characteristic of wide flammability limits, lean operating conditions can be extended [25]. Thanks to its attribute of rapid flame speed, the combustion process can be enhanced, enabling the engine to operate at high speeds, leading to increased power output [26,27]. Furthermore, the issue of flame quenching in WREs can be addressed with the use of hydrogen, given its minimal quenching distance [28]. Consequently, preeminent efficiency and ultra-low emissions can be achieved through hydrogen combustion [29]. 
For the application of pure hydrogen fuel in WRE, Nizar et al. [30] conducted a study on the use of turbulence generating recess in a hydrogen-fueled WRE. They discovered that both the thermal efficiency and lean limit could be enhanced. Zambalov et al. [31] conducted a numerical study on the impact of DI strategies in a hydrogen-fueled WRE designed for DHE. The results indicated that the NOx formation of the DI pattern could be twice as low as the PFI pattern under the same operational conditions. Additionally, the DI multiple strategy permitted a higher equivalence ratio, reaching up to 0.8. Chen et al. [32] also employed numerical simulation in a hydrogen-fueled WRE. They believed that compound intake method and delayed injection timing can achieve optimal fuel distribution to facilitate the combustion process. Meng et al. [33] conducted an experimental study to compare the hydrogen-fueled WRE, gasoline-fueled WRE, and hydrogen-fueled reciprocating piston engine (RPE). They discovered that, in comparison to gasoline-fueled WRE, the hydrogen-fueled ones could achieve a higher brake thermal efficiency in the same engine. The power per displacement of the hydrogen-fueled WRE is 166% that of the hydrogen-fueled RPE when operating at a maximum power of 2,500 r/min. They also carried out tests under low load conditions and found that as the excess air ratio (lambda) increased, near-zero NOx emissions were achieved when lambda exceeded 1.4 [34].

It is widely recognized that the characteristics of combustion, emissions, and performance can be improved by optimizing the ignition source in spark ignition engines [35, 36]. Zambalov et al. [37] simulated the impact of laser ignition on the combustion process of a hydrogen-fueled WRE. The results demonstrated that the enhanced combustion speed and flame propagation speed were faster than those of the conventional engine. However, due to its more complex control, it is challenging to apply the laser ignition system in existing engines. In contrast, optimizing the ignition chamber structure [38, 39] and the ignition strategy [40] is a simpler way to achieve high thermal efficiency. Yang et al. [41] and Meng et al. [42] investigated the impact of single spark plug (SSP) ignition and dual spark plug (DSP) ignition modes on the combustion process. The result indicated that in the SSP cases, the trailing spark plug (TSP) results in a faster combustion rate, an earlier combustion phase, and a higher peak cylinder pressure than leading spark plug (LSP) cases. In DSP mode, the application of asynchronous ignition mode results in higher torque and reduced knock compared to synchronized ignition mode. However, these studies predominantly address lower loads and speeds, not aligning with DHE operating conditions.

In summary, the hydrogen-fueled WRE is an environmentally friendly powertrain with outstanding power characteristics. The DSP system serves as an effective solution to counteract the limitations of the elongated and narrow combustion chamber of WRE. Its characteristics facilitate a more comprehensive and efficient combustion process. Furthermore, since the position, structure, and stability of the flame kernel directly influence the overall combustion process, precise calibration of the ignition timing (IT) is necessary to enhance the initial thermodynamic conditions for flame kernel formation and development. However, the current DSP studies on hydrogen WRE are only at the experimental stage, and the internal mechanisms of the impacts of ignition mode and ignition strategy on the combustion process have not yet been uncovered. Based on this motivation, this study attempts to understand the impact of ignition mode on the performance of pure hydrogen Wankel rotary engines, and develop DHE with the goal of higher indicated thermal efficiency (ITE). Consequently, a three-dimensional (3-D) simulation model is developed, and the reliability of the model is thoroughly verified based on experimental data. As a result, the impacts of spark plug configuration and ignition strategies on combustion characteristics are investigated. Additionally, the optimal ignition strategy to achieve high efficiency and low emissions is determined. This paper can provide some theoretical insights for the optimization of the ignition strategy of the hydrogen-fueled WRE, and offer some theoretical guidance for its practical application.

## 2 Numerical approach

### Engine geometry and computational domain

In the present work, the simulation model is in line with the Mazda Motor Corporation designed 13B-MSP Renesis WRE, and the major technical specifications are listed in Table 1. It should be noted that the intake phases and shape are not as per the standard engine and were optimized in our previous research where the optimal intake closing timing was found to be 317 degrees of eccentric angle ('EA) rotation. A schematic diagram of the modeled WRE is shown in Fig. 1. Together with the side and trochoidal housing the eccentric shaft and triangular rotor essentially comprise the WRE and the latter two are the only moving assemblies. The trochoidal housing and the triangular rotor divide the engine into three separate combustion chambers with a phase interval of 360'EA. Because of the geometry and connection, the speed of the rotor is three times slower that of the eccentric shaft.

In this study, a three-dimensional geometric model of the engine was built in SolidWorks. The Converge Studio [43] was applied to transform the mesh, assign boundaries, and set physical models; the Converge Solver [43] then generates the mesh in real-time during the computation. It allows for complex motion, mesh deformation, and sealing, which are essential for WRE simulations; examples of the resulting mesh are shown in Fig. 2. The accuracy of the computational model has been calibrated and validated, and the detailed procedure can be found in past studies [44].

As depicted in Fig. 2, The in-cylinder flame propagation can be accurately simulated with minimal computational cost using adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) and fixed refinement techniques with a 2 mm base mesh in combustion chamber. Due to the use of AMR method, the minimum grid size is 0.5 mm. At IT, the geometry of the simulated

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l} \hline Specification & Value \\ \hline Displacement [L] & 0.654 \\ Eccentricity [mm] & \(15\) \\ Generating radius [mm] & \(105\) \\ Width [mm] & \(80\) \\ Compression ratio & \(10.0\) \\ Intake opening [’EA] & \(3\) \\ Intake closing [’EA] & \(317\)* \\ Eshustent opening [’EA] & \(760\) \\ Eshustent closing [’EA] & \(1077\) \\ \hline \end{tabular}

*Modified intake phase (see text).

\end{table}
Table 1: Major technical specifications.

combustion chamber is illustrated in Fig. 3. In this work, the non-firing top dead center (TDC) are 0 and 1080'EA and the firing TDC is defined as 540'EA; therefore, \(<\)5'EA after top dead center (aTDC) and 535'EA are equivalent.

### Mathematical model and boundary condition

In this research, the RNG \(\kappa-\epsilon\) model [45] is adopted as the turbulence model to simulate and solve the flow phenomena; this has been widely applied in WRE simulation [28] and validated by particle image velocimetry experiments [46]. The O'Rourke and Amsden function [47] is used to calculate the wall heat transfer. The SAGE combustion model [48] offers the possibility to evaluate premixed and diffusion combustion in detail and in the paper its detailed hydrogen reaction mechanism is used [49]. To accurately simulate the ignition process, the spark-energy deposition model is activated [50]. The spark-ignition process is segmented into three phases: the breakdown, arc, and glow exothermic phases. In the simulation model, the spark-ignition's energy profile releases half its total energy instantly during the breakdown phase, with the rest distributed across the arc and glow exothermic phases. For consistent spark-ignition outcomes, the duration of the breakdown phase is set at 0.5 'EA, and the combined arc and glow exothermic phases last roughly 15 'EA. The energy from spark-ignition disperses in a virtual sphere with a 0.75 mm radius centered around the electrode, and every spark plug possesses an energy of 0.02 J. Table 2 provides the initial and boundary conditions set for the current simulations.

In these, it is assumed that hydrogen and air are uniformly mixed before entering the cylinder, which is a common assumption in simulations of port fuel injection engines. To save computational time, chamber I was chosen as the subject of study. The simulation ranges from 317'EA (intake port connected to combustion chamber I) to 760'EA (exhaust port connected to combustion chamber I) with TDC at 540'EA. Furthermore, the MAP initialization method establishes the initial conditions while mitigating other factors, like intake fluctuations. In other words, the influence of other factors can be ignored.In previous work, the intake phases were optimized using a genetic algorithm combined with machine learning, and the current layout has higher volume efficiency than the original configuration [51, 52]. During all subsequent calculations, the engine speed is set to 5000 rpm and the excess air ratio (lambda) is fixed at 1.8.

### Model validation

To verify the accuracy of the developed model, it is necessary to compare the predicted performance with the available experimental data of the prototype engine. Fig. 4 illustrates the experimental schematics and photographs. The engine system modifications are mainly carried out from two aspects. On the one hand, the gasoline injector was replaced with a hydrogen injector. On the other hand, the self-developed homemade electronic control unit (HECU) was used to control the ignition and injection timings. In fact, the hydrogen injector is designed by Bosch for natural gas, so the flow rate cannot meet the requirements. Therefore, two sets of parallel hydrogen injectors were used in practical

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l} \hline Region & Type & Value \\ \hline Intake & Inflow & 1 bar / 300 K \\ Eshastut & Outflow & 1 bar / 900 K \\ Rotor & Moving wall & 500 K \\ Inlet port & Fixed wall & 300 K \\ Outlet port & Fixed wall & 900 K \\ Housing & Fixed wall & 500 K \\ Spark plug & Fixed wall & 600 K \\ Spark electrode & Fixed wall & 650 K \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 2: Summary of initial and boundary conditions.

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of the modeled WRE.

Figure 3: Geometry of the combustion chamber at ignition timing.

Figure 2: Meshing model of the computational domain.

situations. In the experiment, the lambda is controlled by changing the injection duration. For each test condition, 1000 cycles of data were continuously recorded after the engine was warmed up and operating stably in order to ensure measurement accuracy. A summary of measurement uncertainties is listed in Table 3.

For details on the experimental setup and data measurement procedures, please refer to Ref. [42].

Taking an engine operating condition suitable for a range extender, 5000 rpm was chosen for the subsequent research [31]. However, the operating condition of the tested engine was limited by the hydrogen storage volume and injection mass flow, and the tested engine could only operate stably at the maximum of 3000 rpm and the lean conditions of lambda 1.6 to 2.0. The mean in-cylinder pressure and apparent heat release rate (AHRR) curves from measurement and prediction are compared in Fig. 5. Regarding the AHRR, it is observed that the predicted values match the measured ones well. Therefore, the simulation model is considered to be validated [9].

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{l l l l} \hline Instrument & Type & Accuracy & Manufacturer \\ \hline Engine speed & CAG6 & \(\leq\) \(\pm\)1 rpm & Power link \\ Torque & CAG6 & \(\leq\) \(\pm\)0.40\% F.S. & Power link \\ IHydrogenic volumetric flow rate & DOF-608 & \(\leq\) \(\pm\) 0.02 L/min & Seven star \\ Air volumetric flow rate & 20N060 & \(\leq\) \(\pm\) 0.1 L/min & ToGel \\ Air-to-fuel ratio & MEKA-730i & \(\leq\) \(\pm\) 0.007 & Horiba \\ In-cylinder pressure & 61178PD17 & \(<\) \(\pm\) 0.03 MPa & Käiter \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 3: Summary of measurement uncertainties.

Figure 4: Schematic and photograph of experimental apparatus.

## 3 Results and discussion
### Effect of spark plug configuration on combusion characteristics
This section compares the combustion characteristics between different spark plug configurations with variable IT ranging from -30 to 0◦EA aTDC. It should be stated that the initial and boundary conditions are unchanged and the lambda is fixed at 1.8. The specified parameters of the strategy schemes are listed in Table 4. The relevant calculation formulas are provided in Appendix A. 
Due to the same operation conditions but different ITs, this paper only shows ITE. Fig. 6 compares the ITE with varying IT. The IT of different spark plugs is defined as leading and trailing ITs, i.e., L_IT and T_IT. As expected, appropriately advancing the IT can improve ITE. One possible reason is the difference in the distribution of turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) near the spark plug at IT, as shown in Fig. 7. As the IT is delayed, the TKE in the combustion chamber gradually decreases, which is due to the smaller chamber volume inherently leads to turbulence dissipation (near-wall) and for this reason, the TKE trend is justified. Incremental gains in combustion follow the TKE trends, as the latter 
enhances turbulent mixing and combustion development [5]. In Fig. 7, different dashed ellipses are used to distinguish three regions, namely R1, R2, and R3. R1 is located near TSP, R2 is located near LSP, and R3 is the center of the TKE in the combustion chamber. As the IT is delayed, the volumes of R1, R2, and R3 all decrease. In addition, the position of R3 moves towards the center of the combustion chamber with a delay of IT. However, earlier IT results in earlier combustion phases that are not conducive to work output due to an increase in negative work before firing TDC. 
For the LSP pattern, the best ITE can be achieved when the L_IT is at -20◦EA aTDC, and for TSP pattern, the best T_IT is at -25◦EA aTDC. The difference in the optimal ITE is about 6%. To eliminate the impact of IT on the ITE, this paper compares the contours of flame propagation and streamline distribution when both the L_IT and T_IT are at -20◦EA aTDC 
which is the optimal ITE for LSP pattern. 
Fig. 8 describes the influence of variation of the ignition strategy on the flame propagation and the distribution of the velocity streamlines at 530◦EA, 540◦EA, 550◦EA, 560◦EA, and 580◦EA. As illustrated in Fig. 8, the direction of the one-way streamlines is the same as the rotational direction of the rotor. The geometry difference between the LSP and TSP and the one-way flow lead to different flame fronts [15]. On the one hand, referring to Fig. 3, the geometry of the TSP is similar to a passive pre-combation chamber which enhances the combustion development [18]. On the other hand, the unidirectional flow field in the same direction as the flame propagation enhances combustion development. In addition, it can be seen from the velocity field in Fig. 8 that the amplitude of the velocity field for TSP ignition is higher than that for LSP ones, which is also beneficial for combustion development. Moreover, the larger recess of the chamber also provides space for propagation of trailing flame front. For the flame front caused by LSP, the reduced space at the front of the combustion chamber inhibits flame propagation forward. Moreover, the unidirectional flow field also inhibits flame propagation towards the rear of combustion chamber. Therefore, the flame front does not go past the LSP position in the direction of the trailing apex of the rotor.

To clarify the characteristic of flame propagation, the burned volume rate (BVR) is introduced, and the definition and schematic are shown as Eq. 1 and Fig. 8, respectively. It can be appreciated from Fig. 9 that the BVR traces first increase and then decrease. In addition, the burned volume of LSP has two peaks. This is because the unidirectional flow field makes it difficult for the flame to propagate backward, resulting in an unburned zone at the rear of combustion chamber. As the volume of the combustion chamber increases, the strength of the unidirectional flow field weakens, so the unburned area at the rear of combustion chamber begins to burn. It is critical to understand how the ignition environment affects flame development and BVR. According to the kinetic mechanism, the concentrations of OH, H, and O radicals have a strong influence on the combustion process. As depicted in Fig. 10, the radical concentrations in the TSP cases are about twice those of the LSP pattern, which promotes the flame propagation process.

\[BVR=\lim_{\alpha\frac{V_{E\text{A},\text{T}}}{E\text{A}}}-V_{E\text{A}} \tag{1}\]

### Effect of different ignition strategies on combustion characteristics

This section compares the combustion characteristics between the different ignition strategies. The specified parameters of the strategy schemes are listed in Table 5. The "Syn" pattern is synchronous ignition with both spark plugs firing together, and the IT changes from -30 to 0'EA ATDC. In the "Asyn_L" pattern, the T,IT is fixed at -20'EA ATDC, and the I,IT ranges from -30 to 0'EA ATDC. In the Asyn_T' pattern, the L,IT is fixed with varying T,IT. Therefore, in the asynchronous ignition pattern, when T,IT is fixed at -20'EA ATDC and L,IT is at -5'EA ATDC, it is recorded as "Asyn_L-5". The comparison of IFE for three patterns is illustrated in Fig. 11. Overall, the IFE of the Syn pattern is lower than Asyn_L and Asyn_T patterns at the same IT.

Regarding the Asyn_L pattern, the IFE remains unchanged when L,IT is delayed to -10'EA ATDC. This is because the flame front of TSP has spread to the vicinity of the LSP, and the LSP has little or no effect on flame propagation. To elaborate the impact of ignition patterns on flame propagation, the temperature distribution contours are compared Fig. 12 (a). In Fig. 12 (a), the highest IFE is selected for both Syn and Asyn_T patterns. In addition, the Asyn_L pattern in which the IFE remains unchanged is also compared. The IFE of the above case are 39.51, 39.57, and 39.38%, respectively. By comparing Syn and Asyn_T, the influence of L,IT on flame propagation can be determined, while the

Figure 8: Contours of flame propagation and velocity streamlines distribution for varying EAs.

Figure 9: Evolution of burned volume and burned volume rate as a function of EA.

impact of T_IT on flame propagation can be analyzed by comparing Syn and Asyn_L, Fig. 12 (b) summarizes the combustion patterns, in which the pink outline is the TSP flame and the yellow outline is the LSP flame. It should be noted that Asyn_T and Asyn_L represent T_IT and L_IT retard respectively in the asynchronous ignition scenario.

The LSP temperature contour between Asyn_T-5 and Syn-20 is very similar during combustion, especially before 550'EA. During 560-580'EA, the TSP flame affects the rear of the LSP flame, resulting in a different flame profile. Under the Syn-20 scheme, the two kernels are connected together earlier, and the rate of rise in the combustion area begins to slow down. In addition, as the black dashed ellipses shown in Fig. 12 (a), it is different from Asyn_T-5 case, the flame of Syn-20 propagating towards the rear of combustion chamber, which may then lead to abnormal combustion. Compared to Asyn_L-5 and Syn-20, the temperature contour of TSP is very similar. Due to L. IT being relatively delayed, and the flame of TSP already spreading to the vicinity of LSP when its ignition occurs, the LSP has almost no contribution to combustion. The temperature contour is very similar to the flame profile of a single TSP pattern. However, as shown in the black dashed ellipses, similar to the Syn-20 case, the flames propagate backwards, which may increase the trend of abnormal combustion.

As illustrated in Fig. 13 (a), using BVR can better quantify the combustion process. The BVR of Asyn_T-5 is lower than the others at the beginning of combustion, but the BVR increases abruptly around 550'EA, and then remains almost the same as the Syn-20 case. The BVR of Asyn_L-5 is greater than the others after 570'EA, but the phase is relatively delayed, resulting in the slowest overall combustion process. In Figure Fig. 13 (b), the sum of the peak mass fractions of OH, O, and H radicals for the three ignition strategies are compared in a stacked histogram. It is clear that the sum of the peak radicals under the Asyn_T-5 scheme is higher than the others. This indicates that more free radicals are available to participate in the reactions during the high temperature oxidation, which promotes the increase of the temperature gradient and combustion.

The comparison of mean pressure and combustion phases is presented in Fig. 14. The peak pressure of Syn-20 and Asyn_T-5 cases are similar and the Asyn_L-5 case is lower than others. The ranking of the eccentric shaft angle at 10% mass fraction burned (EA10) is Syn-20, Asyn_L-5 and Asyn_T-5 which suggests that the TSP is important for initial flame development. The EA10-50 (defined as EA50 minus EA10) of Asyn_T-5 is less than the others indicating a faster flame propagation in this scenario. In addition, the delay of EA10 indicates that the negative work is relatively small in this scenario too. Moreover, the EA90 is earlier, which further demonstrates that combustion is faster.

Fig. 15 shows a comparison of emissions and performance. For the NOx emissions, the maximum value of the three scenarios is less than 120 ppm. According to a simple estimate based on engine displacement, future emissions standards can meet when the efficiency of the after-treatment is above 90% [53, 54]. The combustion efficiency of Asyn_T-5 is higher than the others, indicating less unburned fuel in the combustion chamber at exhaust port opening timing: this can also be confirmed from the combustion phases. The indicated specific fuel consumption (ISFC) and indicated mean effective pressure (IMEP) are directly related to ITE due to the same amount of fuel being used in each case. The NOx emissions, combustion efficiency, ISFC, and IMEP of Asyn_T-5 are 118.7 ppm, 99.99%, 75.8 g/kWh, and 6.8 bar, respectively. Therefore, taking into account both emissions and performance, Asyn_T-5 is considered to be the optimal ignition strategy.

## 4 Conclusions

This work aims to explore the combustion characteristics of a hydrogen-fueled WRE using CFD modeling. The effects of spark plug configuration and ignition strategies on combustion characteristics were investigated. The main findings are summarized as follows:

1. the TSP patterns achieve higher ITE than LSP patterns for the spark plug configuration cases. Owing to the inherent unidirectional flow field and the geometry of the combustion chamber, the forward direction of the flame front of the LSP is suppressed by the combustion

Figure 11: Comparison of ITE for varying ITs at DSP mode.

Figure 10: Evolution of important intermediates (O, H, and OH radicals) as a function of EA.

\begin{table}
\begin{tabular}{p{56.9pt} p{113.8pt} p{113.8pt}} \hline Symbol & Ignition pattern & Ignition timing [’EA \#TDC’] \\ \hline Syn & Synchronous ignition & ITE \(-\)30–0, step 5’EA \\ Asyn_T & Asynchronous ignition & T\(\_\)IT \(-\)30–0, step 5’EA \\ Asyn_L & Asynchronous ignition & L\(\_\)IT \(-\)30–0, step 5’EA \\ \hline \end{tabular}
\end{table}
Table 5: Comparison of synchronous and asynchronous ignition strategy schemes.

Figure 12: Contours of temperature distribution and flame propagation pattern at DSP model.

Figure 13: Evolution of BVR and peak radical values at DSP model.

chamber, and the backward direction is suppressed by the unidirectional flow field. In contrast, the flame of the TSP is accelerated by the flow field and the recess provides the space for flame proration. 2. The TKE plays an essential role in flame propagation and delayed IT can decrease TKE. Conversely, early IT may lead to greater negative power. As IT advances, the TTE exhibits an increasing and then decreasing trend. For the SSP condition, the optimal L_IT is at -20'EA aTDC; for the TSP pattern, the optimal TIT is at -25'EA aTDC. 3. Under the DSP condition, asynchronous ignition yields a higher TTE than synchronous ignition given the same parameters. As ignition timing (IT) advances, the ITE of synchronized ignition initially increases, peaks at -20'EA aTDC, then decreases. For Asyn_L cases, ITE rises gradually with the delay of L_IT and plateaus once L_IT surpasses -10'EA aTDC. For Asyn_T cases, ITE exhibits fluctuations as T_IT is delayed, with optimal ITE observed when T_IT is -5'EA aTDC. 4. Observations from the temperature contours indicate that early T_IT leads to backward flame propagation, potentially causing abnormal combustion. In the Asy_T-5 scenario, combustion efficiency, ISFC, and IMEP are optimized, with NOx levels below Syn_T-20 and less than 110 ppm. It is proposed that near-zero NOx emissions can be realized by incorporating SCR.

For practical applications, the IT should be controlled under a wider range of lambdas, which will be carried out in future work.

Figure 14: Evolution of mean pressure and combustion phasing at DSP model (note “EAXX” denotes the eccentric shaft angle at which XX% of the mixture has burned).

Figure 15: Comparison of emissions and performance at DSP model.

[MISSING_PAGE_FAIL:10]

* [29] Bao I, Sun B, Luo Q. Optimal control strategy of the introduction direct-injection hydrogen engine to achieve near-zero emissions with large power and high brake thermal efficiency. Part 2022;325:214913.
* [30] Nizar J, Mukai M, Kagawa R, et al. An amelioration of Combustion of Hydrogen Rotype Engine. Int J Automaton Eng. 2012;32(3):81-8.
* [31] Zambalov S, Yakovlev I, Mamay A. Effect of multiple fuel injection strategies on mixture formation and combustion in a hydrogen-fueled rotary range catheter for battery electric vehicles. Energy Converses Manag 2020;220:113097.
* [32] Chen W, Yu S, Zuo Q, et al. Combined effect of air intake method and hydrogen injection timing on airflow movement and mixture formation in a hydrogen direct injection rotary engine. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2022;27(5):1273-58.
* [33] Meng H, Ji C, Xing G, et al. Comparison of combustion, emission and abnormal combustion of hydrogen-fueled fueled rotary engine and reciprocating piston engine. Part 2022;318:126375.
* [34] Meng H, Ji C, Yang J, et al. Experimental study of the effects of excess air ratio on combustion and emission characteristics of the hydrogen-fueled rotary engine. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2021;64(603):32261-72.
* [35] Gong C, Ji C, Zhang F, et al. Assessment of ultra-lean burn characteristics for a stratified-charge direct-injection spark-ignignignign channel engine under different high compression ratios. Part 2022;2020:21:114478.
* [36] Gong C, Li Z, Sun J, et al. Evaluation on combustion and lean-burn limit of a medium compression ratio hydrogen/methanol dual-injection spark-ignignign engine under methanol line-ideide-injection. Appl Energy 2020;2027:115622.
* [37] Zambalov S, Yakovlev I, Skirpysky V, Numerical simulation of hydrogen combustion process in rotary engine with laser ignition system. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2014;22(7):1725-19.
* [38] Yang J, Ji C, Yang J, et al. An the optimization of leading spark plug location and its influence on combustion and leakage in a hydrogen-fueled Wankel rotary engine. Int J Hydrogen Energy 2022;238:4653(2):20465-82.
* [39] Jiao H, Ye X, Zou R, et al. Comparative study on ignition and combustion between conventional spark-ignignignign method and near-wall surface ignition method for small-scale Wankel rotary engine. Energy 2022;225:124500.
* [40] Shi C, Ji C, Wang S, et al. Numerical simulation on combustion process of a hydrogen direct-injection stratified gasoline Wankel engine by synchronous and asynchronous ignition models. Energy Converses Manag 2019;183:14-25.
* [41] Yang J, Meng H, Ji C, Yang J, et al. Comparatively investigating the leading and trailing spark plug on the hydrogen rotary engine. Fuel 2022;302:1220508.
* [42] Meng H, Ji C, Yang J, et al. Experimentally investigating the asynchronous ignition on a hydrogen-fueled Wankel rotary engine. Fuel 2022;312:122988.
* [43] Richards KJ, Senecal PR, Pomraning E, CONVERIGR 3.0 manual. Madison, WI: Convergent Science, 2020.
* [44] Yang J, Wang H, Ji C, et al. Investigation of intake closing timing on the flow field and combustion process in a small-scaled Wankel rotary engine under various engine speeds designed for the UAV application. Energy 2023;27:127147.
* [45] Itz, Reiter M, Duhnevalence modeling of internal combustion engines using RNG we models. Combustion Science and Technology 1996;10(64):62:97-95.
* [46] Fan B, Zhang Y, Pan J, et al. Experimental and numerical study on the formation mechanism of flow field in a side-ported rotary engine considering apex seal leakage. J Energy Resour Technol 2020;143(2).
* [47]**Ansceda A.A., Findley RHX-3: A block-structured KIVA program for engines with vertical or canted valves. 1997**.
* [48] Senecal PK, Pomraning E, Richards KJ, et al. Multi-dimensional modelling of direct-injection diesel spray liquid length and flame lift-off length using CFD and parallel definertial chemistry. SATH clinical paper. 2003;01:01401. 2003.
* [49] Li J, Zhao Z, Kazakov A, et al. An updated comprehensive kinetic model of hydrogen combustion. Int J Chem 2004;10(5):566-76.
* [50] Yang X, Solomon A, Kuo TW. Ignition and combustion simulations of spray-guided shell engine using arcluous combustion with spark-energy deposition model. SAE technical paper. 2012;014:017, 2012.
* [51] Wang H, Ji C, Yang J, et al. Implementation of a novel dual-layer machine learning structure for predicting the intake characteristics of a side-ported Wankel rotary engine. Aerosp Sci Technol 2022;132:108042.
* [52] Wang H, Ji C, Yang J, et al. Towards a comprehensive optimization of the intake characteristics for single-ported Wankel rotary engines by coupling machine learning with genetic algorithm. Energy 2022;261:125334.
* [53] Jiu, Sun W, Feng F, et al. NMS and N20 emission durability of the heavy-duty fuel engine with NODE, DDF, SCR, and ASC through the accelerated aging method. Fuel 2023;339:126950.
* [54] Lyu L, Ji Z, Yin H, et al. NOx emission deterioration in modern heavy-duty diesel vehicles based on long-term real driving measurements. Environ Res 2023;232:116396.